well today we're going to have a look at
the night
sky in February of
2025 and there's lots to look at it's a
great time of year to do observing so
we're starting here with the view in the
afternoon over the Cambridge Countryside
and I'm just going to let things run
forward what we're going to do is let
the sun head off over towards the west
and sink down towards um The Horizon as
it does so we'll bring that over now and
we'll start to see that the sky will
gradually turn from uh the normal blue
color beginning with the colors of
sunset we'll get orange and yellow
coming into the sky as the sun gets
lower down and we'll bring that to a
stop just as the sun has set just at the
moment after it's fully disappeared
below the Horizon so there we go we're
going to stop it just about here and and
we should start to see the first of our
astronomical objects just in the
Twilight and this is our last chance
really this year to be able to get a
good look at the planet Saturn sat very
low on the horizon this is the sort of
view you'd get with an amateur telescope
a 6 or 8 in reflector obviously the
labels have been put on by the software
you have to identify the moons yourself
sorry about that um but it's relatively
easy to do you can use the app to help
you if we zoom in on the planet then you
can see more detail you can see the
pastel shades of the cloud belts of the
planet and the very very thin Rings In A
month's time those Rings will be
absolutely Edge on to us and they will
vanish all we'll see is the round planet
and the
moons when I first started doing
astronomy we uh only knew of a the
number of big moons of s PN the biggest
of which was Titan and it was thought to
be the largest moon in the solar system
actually when you look at it it looks
this orange color because you're looking
at the atmosphere full of smog and
organic molecules and you can't see
through to the ground and that
atmosphere makes it look a bit bigger
than it truly is as a solid object um so
in fact gany made that orbits Jupiter is
larger we'll see that in a moment so
we're going to scroll over and let time
run forward a bit pointing up and uh
towards the South we have a number of
bright stars there's a constellation of
all rer in the middle of the screen
there but if we pull back so that we've
got this fishey lens view of the whole
of the sky above us we can identify some
of the main
constellations
Andromeda Pisces there the
fish Aries the next one round in the
uh zodiac Taurus of course the bull
Gemini the
Twins then we've got cancer the crab and
just rising up over there we have Leo
not in the Zodiac of course my favorite
constellation of all which is Orion and
no tour of the night sky is complete
really in the northern hemisphere at
least without Earth's a major and Earth
a minor The Great Bear and the little
bear and that orange line that's the
line of the planets and you can see that
several of the bright objects are close
to that we're going to have a look at
those in a few minutes and work our way
across the parade of planets but first
we should start all good tours of the
northern hemisphere night sky with the
Great Bear the Big Dipper the scean
handle Ursa
Major there he is laid out on the sky
was a very large constellation indeed
and there are a lot of interesting
objects in it what we're going to do
first is go half way along the tail and
look at the stars misar and Alor which
are a double star pair misar and Alcor
orbit round each other but if we Zoom
right in this case we're going to zoom
in on misar you will see that the
telescope shows us that misar itself is
double and if we did that with Alor that
too would appear double so this is a
double double star
system an awful lot of the stars out
there are double something like seven 7
80% of star systems have more than one
and our sun is relatively
unusual also just next to the taale of
the Great Bear we have the pin wheel
Galaxy sea object number 101 20 million
light years away Way outside our galaxy
The photons that were captured in the
image here traveling for 20 million
years before landing in the camera it's
quite an amazing thought isn't it and
that's a classic face on spiral galaxy
if we cross over to the other side of
the tail of the Great
Bear and uh just have a look just down
here we can zoom in and find another
galaxy this is the whirlpool Galaxy and
in this case again we have the face on
Galaxy but it's in the process of eating
a smaller dwarf Galaxy at the top left
there that's come too close to it and
there's stars and dust and gas been
hurled all over the place by the chaos
that uh the enormous train wreck that's
going on there at the moment is causing
so that's the whirlpool Galaxy one of
the first galaxies to be looked at and
identified as having that spiral
structure over here in the base of the
Great Bear there a different type of
object this is the owl nebula this is
the remains of a sunlike star that's
reached the end of its fuel run out of
ability to carry on generating energy by
nuclear fusion and puffed off its outer
layers to make a kind of smoke ring in
space looks a bit like the shape of an
owl those are called planetary nebula
but they have nothing really to do with
planets they just they looked a bit
round and Blobby in Old telescopes just
above it we have the surfboard Galaxy
this one's even further away 45 million
light years um it is a spiral galaxy
it's somewhat Edge on to us so it's hard
to see the spiral structure and there
are a lot of those dark dust Lanes
carving across uh through the uh image
there you pull back from the surfboard
Galaxy now and go above the bowl of the
Big Dipper you can find a nice little
cluster of galaxies by following a
diagonal line and ending up
here this is bod's
Galaxy and its neighbors there are three
little Neighbors in the picture you can
see one to the right one at the bottom
and one just left so bod's Galaxy a
classic spiral galaxy it's about 10 1
half million light years away and just
next to it literally a neighbor in space
is the cigar Galaxy and this
one has had a bit of a near miss with
its larger neighbor about 6 million
years ago and it's twisted and distorted
it and caused chaos and it's throwing
out huge Jets of that red hydrogen gas
out from the center of the Galaxy um
just all caused by the gravitational
disruption of coming too close to its
giant
neighbor now we're going to move from
The Great Bear to the little Bear is in
the center of the screen now there's the
stick diagram and you can see the body
of the bear at the bottom and a great
long tail now there's always something
wrong about this because Bears don't
have long tails so one suspects that the
person who saw uh the these patterns in
the sky and made them up hadn't really
studied Bears very well but the tip of
the tail of the bear is a very special
star from our point of view it's Polaris
the pole star or the North Star and it
just so happens that at the moment the
Earth's axis is pointing at the pole
star the result of that is that it
appears to stay still whilst the whole
of the sky rotates around it we're going
to sim at that by running time forward
at a very high rate looking up north
straight up at the North Pole of the sky
and you see that Polaris remains
stationary all all the other stars seem
to rotate around it that's of course
because the Earth is turning the other
way underneath going round once a
day and so we'll let that go back and
I'll run time back to where I was and
put it back so that uh everything's in
the correct position before we move move
on the other interesting thing about
Polaris is that it's a very useful
distance marker it's a special kind of
star called a seid variable which
pulsates and the rate of pulsation is a
direct measure of the power output and
if we compare the power output to the
perceived brightness that we see we can
work out how far away it is by the
standard candle rule if you double the
distance away that a standard candle is
it'll look AC water as bright triple it
a ninth as bright so we can use Polaris
to work out the distance uh to that
particular star and uh it's a these
stars are fairly rare but they're common
enough that we can find them in all
sorts of other places and use them as
yard sticks now we're going to look at
the planet Venus very bright at the
moment it's at its
brightest just a Cresent lit showing I
was observing it just the other night
with a small telescope we had a little
telescope Fest out on the uh lawn of the
north umland uh Observatory here in
Cambridge lots of people brought their
Scopes along we had a look at Venus
through a small 4in telescope it only
looked like a a cresant moon really but
you could see that it wasn't a star you
could see that shape and you won't see
very much more with a larger telescope
because all we're seeing is the cloud
tops the atmosphere of Venus is a 100
times as dense as our our own and full
of clouds so you don't really see
anything down onto the surface you just
see this small cresant shape the phase
changes it goes uh as it comes around
and overtakes us on the inside which
it's about to do it gets thinner and
thinner and then disappears into the
morning sky and the Cresent points the
other way so that's
Venus the second planet of our tour and
the planets lie along that orange line
called the
ecliptic roughly because the solar
system is roughly flat uh that's the
path the sun takes across the sky and
the planets pretty much stick to that
now out into deep space again we're
going to look at the constellation of
Andromeda which is that stick line with
a line sticking out the side of it
somehow that was made into a maiden
there she is she's upside down but never
mind and she's chained to a rock this is
all part of the legend that things were
based on and really there are just the
four main bright stars there in a line
but it's also interesting because it's
home to the Andromeda galaxy and that's
shown here this is the nearest galaxy to
our Milky Way There is main spiral
galaxy uh it's a little bigger than the
Milky Way and 2 and a half million light
years away so a lot closer than the
other galaxies we've visited so far and
it appears much larger it's about five
times as big as the full moon on the sky
best observed with binoculars a
telescope really drills into it too
closely it's got some companion galaxies
this is M32 which orbits around the main
Galaxy uh it's not a star that's why it
looks blurred and it has another
slightly
larger companion Galaxy
m110 which again orbits around it very
much uh easier to see that this is a
Galaxy in fact of course we have them
but we have companions that orbit our
Milky Way galaxy uh we have the large
and small melenic clouds that you can
see from the southern hemisphere um and
we have a number of other small galaxies
as
well the third large member of our local
group of galaxies is this one this is
the triangulum Galaxy and it's rather a
sort of fluffy Galaxy it has got that
spiral arm structure face onto us but
the spiral arms are a bit fluffy and IL
defined and it's a smaller Galaxy it's
about one tenth the mass of the Milky
Way so rather smaller and a little bit
further away 3 million light years just
beyond Andromeda probably captured by
the gravity all three the triangulum
Galaxy Andromeda and the Milky Way will
merge in about 5,000 million years time
going deeper 27 million light years away
also in Andromeda this is the outer
limits Galaxy it is a spiral galaxy but
it's viewed absolutely Edge on and you
can see that sort of double fried egg
back to back arrangement with a bulge in
the middle and the spiral arms laid out
where the whites would be along the
sides with a big dark dust Lane cutting
it in two so that's uh some of the
objects that we can see in and around
the constellation of Andromeda so what
we're going to do is pull back now and
then we'll move on and take a look to
see what else else we can see on our
planetary tour let's go over here this
is Jupiter again just near that orange
line of the ecliptic a very bright
object high in the sky at the moment and
I looked at this last night and it
looked like this um this is the disc of
the planet with the dark dust Lanes
across it and the four moons laid out
three on one side IO Europa and ganim
and Kalisto off on its own there on the
other side all orbiting around the
equatorial plane of the planet but if we
Zoom right in we see a lot more detail
you start to see how uh intricate the
cloud belts are the North and South
polar regions one or two white spots
which are large hurricanes in the very
fast moving Winds of Jupiter and some
barges those blue things but if we move
out the moons turn out to be very very
interesting this is IO looks a bit like
a pizza doesn't it but it's uh not made
of cheese at all this is sulfur and
sulfur if you cool it down at different
rates you get white black orange and
yellow and those are the only colors you
see on iO because it is the most
volcanic place we know and absolutely
turning itself inside out just next door
we have Europa the second large moon of
Jupiter completely different which is
very shiny and white looking but covered
in grooves and cracks um one or two
small craters but mostly it just looks
like sea ice because there is a liquid
water ocean underneath a layer of ice
there and it's a prime candidate for
finding some sort of alien life forms
living in the Briny ocean this is ganim
the largest of the moons in the solar
system considerably larger than IO and
Europa and again we think this has
liquid water underneath an ice shell so
another candidate for one of these ice
work worlds with a liquid water ocean
very very interesting from the point of
view of a
astrobiology the study of alien
life orbiting further out is Kalisto and
this is very different again this is a
dead moon it's so far away from the
gravity of Jupiter it doesn't get any
tidal Heating and it's dead solid and
covered in craters so very much uh the
sort of boring one of the four
no doubt I'll be proved wrong about that
at some point in the future but that's
in the constellation there of Taurus the
Bull so just above the face of Taurus
you have that very bright object and
that's Jupiter there's the stick diagram
of Taurus only the front half of the
bull is present it's got the very large
horns but only two front legs you go
hind quarters and back legs are missing
uh they're actually should be where the
constellation of Aries is but uh never
mind
in the face of the tourus the bull
you've got the vshape there with the
bright star Al dearon an orange giant
coming to the end of its life and then
over here we have the pades or seven
sisters a young star cluster just 75
million years old you see six seven
eight maybe bright stars with the naked
eye if you got nice clear skies um but
there are about 1500 all together you
only see the really powerful bright ones
the uh smaller less massive fainter ones
can be picked up with binoculars or a
telescope and actually binoculars are
the best because this is quite a large
object and the telescope again has two
narrow a field of
view so if we move over to the tip of
the horns of Taurus we find the Crab
Nebula Messier object number one this is
an exploded star a giant star that has
blown up and it was observed in the act
of exploding in the year 1054 ad all
over the world the Chinese Japanese even
the North American uh original
inhabitants saw it and did rock art
marking the event it was so spectacular
so that's the Crab
Nebula and uh it's still expanding today
we can measure that with our
spectrometers and see the rate at which
it's expanding and work back and it all
fits with the explosion a giant star in
1054 so we're now going to move on and
we'll let time run forward to midnight
this brings some of the other things
that I want to have a look at into a
better position so the sky is uh moving
around there as uh the night goes on
Taurus is heading down towards the
horizon and we'll just bring it to a
stop there and go and look at the next
planet on our tour this is the planet
Mars very red looking again looked at
this with a collection of small
telescopes the other night it's always
disappointing in telescopes because it's
so small I first imagined Mars to be a
marvelous thing to look at but it's
always disappointing compared to the
giant planets just because this is half
the size of the Earth so quite a modest
planet in its own right it's got those
two moons there Phobos and deos and it's
covered in these red deserts you can see
the red deserts you can just just about
make out the dark markings of the
Highland regions there and you can
usually spot the polar caps there's one
at the top right there and uh Mars is
very frustrating to observe because it
spins in 24 hours and 38 minutes so if
you come back the next night it's turned
right round and shows you the same face
again so it takes a long time before you
get to see anything different on the
other side unlike uh the planet Jupiter
which hurtles around in just 10 hours
and changes all the
time so now we're going to have a look
down at Orion just before it sets Orion
the hunter facing off there against
Taurus the Bull an eternal battle in the
sky there he
is and lots and lots of things to see in
Orion it's just next to the Milky Way
there's huge clouds of G gas and dust
there's this star here bjers Beetle
Juice it's a red giant star and it's due
to blow up as a supernova anytime soon
it could be tomorrow or it could be
another million years perhaps um but it
will blow up as a supernova we think um
once it finally finally runs out of
options by way of nuclear fusion so
that's bleers the top leftand corner of
Orion if we go down into the sword
handle of Orion we see the Orion nebula
one of my favorite objects in the sky of
all an expanding cloud of gas and dust
where it's formed new stars originally
gravity was winning pulling material
together making it denser but once the
stars have lit up with their nuclear
fusion kicking off they're blowing a
huge bubble and blowing away the rest of
the birth cocon and that'll make us a
star cluster of maybe a thousand stars
um once the rest of the gas has been
blown away by the strong Sol Stellar
Winds of all those Stars moving up to
the left hand side of Orion's Belt we've
got the star alac it's a a blue Giant
star very hot indeed putting out lots of
radiation lots of ultraviolet radiation
and that is lighting up the gas causing
this red streak here with the finger of
dark Dusty material curling in front of
it to make the HSE head nebula and then
just at the top there the flame nebula
as well those are well worth trying to
go after if you got really dark skies um
they're not as bright as the Orion
Nebula so more difficult to
observe and if we move on again above
Orion's Belt we get to another different
kind of nebula another cloud of gas and
dust but here it's glowing blue and
what's happening is that there is a hot
young Blue Star hiding behind the dirty
Dusty material that is blocking our view
and the blue light from the star is then
bouncing back to us off The Cloud of
more distant material that's called a
reflection nebula for obvious reasons
and is a a relatively uncommon uh
observation really and perhaps m78 is
the best example if you want to go and
have a look at a reflection
nebula so there's loads more to look at
in Orion we could spend the entire
show looking at different objects that
are in there but we're going to move on
up here to the constellation of cancer
now cancer has almost no bright stars in
it at all it's very hard to spot it lies
between Gemini on the right and Leo on
the left which is the best way to find
it is to find either one of those two
and then work your way in in the center
there are four relatively modest Stars
making up a sort of quadrilateral and if
we zoom in on that it's got a lovely
star cluster called PRI or the Beehive
cluster right in the middle um rather
older cluster than the pades so there
are no short-lived hot blue stars there
there are only more modest ones in the
group um but it makes a nice object to
look at with binoculars or a small
telescope so that's the Beehive
cluster in the constellation of cancer
the crab again this is on the Zodiac
it's on the ecliptic the uh planets do
tend to pass through this constellation
and I sometimes uh even go very close to
or in front of that star cluster which
makes a nice shot uh if you're doing any
astrophotography so we'll pull back a
little bit and let's go and have a look
at our next Target we'll go back and
have a look at Gemini lying between
Taurus and Cancer Gemini the Heavenly
twins you've got the two stars at the
top there Casta and Pollock and the
twins holding hands with their feet at
the bottom and the interloper the bright
red thing we've already looked at that
that's Mars passing through this Zodiac
constellation at the moment there's a
couple of nice uh deep Sky objects to go
and have a look for there's the jelly
fish nebula here which is a much older
Supernova Remnant maybe as old as 30,000
years years in the past a star exploded
and we just see the remaining expanding
shock wave of blown off material here um
looks a bit like a jellyfish I can see
why they've given it that name so that's
quite nice there's lots of other objects
you can probably see a few of them in
the screen there already we've got the
monkey head nebula down here and it does
look a bit like a monkey head it's
upside down the top of the head is
bottom left and the mouth is that little
diot towards the lower right there with
the neck up at the top so you've got to
spin that round in your mind and then
you might see the monkey head and again
we've got different colors there we've
got the red from hydrogen the yellow
from Helium and the blue there is blue
light bouncing from that star so that's
a little bit of a reflection nebula as
well another planetary nebula the
remains of a sunlike star is this one
the Eskimo nebula this has undergone a
series of eruptions blowing off these
shells of gas from a dying star in the
center and it looks like a little face
with a fur hood hence the name and
um that's really quite a nice compact
object to try and pin down with a
telescope but it is rather in the middle
of nowhere so you have to get quite good
at uh being able to Star hop across some
of the fainter stars to get the
telescope pointing in right
place so those are some of the objects
in
Gemini very nicely placed at the moment
very high up um and well worth the look
if you get clear
skies so now we're going to move on just
to the last part of this little show and
that will be into the pre-dawn sky you
can see the band of the Milky Way there
running across just traversing the
bottom end of Gemini as time goes on
Orion is set Jupiter's disappeared
Gemini is disappearing now down behind
the trees Mars just about to be uh going
behind that tree and down towards the
horizon but we'll stop there and go a
look at the last constellation of the
tour and that is Leo the Lion and this
one actually does look like what it's
supposed to I can see a lion and a
lion's head and a lion's body when I
look at the stick diagram it's uh quite
rare really that they they do look like
what they're supposed to so there's Leo
just next door to cancer and Below uh
the feet of the Great
Bear some interesting objects in here
again most of these are galaxies we've
got groups of galaxies these are named
by Charles Messier so this is M 95 96
and 105 that we have here and what
what's happening is we're looking
straight out into deep space out beyond
the Milky Way into areas where there are
clusters of galaxies this one's unusual
it's got a big ring around it as well as
being a spiral galaxy possibly the
result of another collision between a
pair of galaxies at some point in the
past when you look at galaxies you tend
to spot uh that they can are mostly
these spirals but here we've got an
example of some other forms there's an
elliptical galaxy there and a
more of a lenticular shaped one as well
so that not all galaxies are these pure
Spirals and the result of Galaxy merges
spiral galaxies bump into each other
merge together tend to form these large
football-shaped
ellipticals got another group over here
Leo is absolutely fested with galaxies
this is one of the famous triplets m66
65 and one that Charles Messier missed
in his catalog so it's got a an NGC new
general catalog number of
3628 um and that one looks like and is
named the hamburger Galaxy because of
its shape it does look right rather like
two Pates of meat with a gap between
them gap of course that's dust and uh
blocking out the staright um so quite an
unusual looking Galaxy it is probably a
spiral and we're looking straight at the
edge of it Edge on so this those three
galaxies there so several groups of them
and one of my favorite galaxies of the
lot the Catherine wheel NGC
2903 this is a Galaxy probably similar
to the Milky Way in having an elongated
nucleus a So-Cal barred spiral galaxy um
and then the central part of the Galaxy
is very orange and red with long lived
aged stars all the new stars have died
out there the young stars have gone no
new ones have been formed whereas the
spiral arms tend to have lots of star
formation going on and so we have lots
of young blue hot stars that uh have
been newly created but won't be around
for long and that tends to be the case
in all galaxies and so with that I'm
going to bring this show to an end and
we'll just uh spin it round and uh I
hope you've enjoyed that and we'll have
a come back next month and have a look
at the night sky in March